The grep command is a very popular command among Linux users. This powerful command can search for any word or pattern inside a file.
The grep command to search for the word "THM" inside a big text file.
ex - grep THM dictionary.txt

Types of linux shells---
Like the Command Prompt and PowerShell in Windows OS, Linux has different types of shells available, each with its own features and characteristics.
Multiple shells are installed in different Linux distributions. To see which shell you are using, type the following command: echo $SHELL
You can also list down the available shells in your Linux OS. The file /etc/shells contains all the installed shells on a Linux system. You can list down the available shells in your Linux OS by typing cat /etc/shells in the terminal.

Bourne Again Shell--
Bourne Again Shell (Bash) is the default shell for most Linux distributions. When you open the terminal, bash is present for you to enter commands. Before bash, some shells like sh, ksh, and csh had different capabilities. Bash came as an enhanced replacement for these shells, borrowing capabilities from all of them. This means that it has many of the features of these old shells and some of its unique abilities.
Some of the key features provided by bash are listed below:
Bash is a widely used shell with scripting capabilities.
It offers a tab completion feature, which means if you are in the middle of completing a command, you can press the tab key on your keyboard. It will automatically complete the command based on a possible match or give you multiple suggestions for completing it.
Bash keeps a history file and logs all of your commands. You can use the up and down arrow keys to use the previous commands without typing them again. You can also type history to display all your previous commands.

Friendly Interactive Shell--
Friendly Interactive Shell (Fish) is also not default in most Linux distributions. As its name suggests, it focuses more on user-friendliness than other shells. Some of the key features provided by fish are listed below:
It offers a very simple syntax, which is feasible for beginner users.
Unlike bash, it has auto spell correction for the commands you write.
You can customize the command prompt with some cool themes using fish.
The syntax highlighting feature of fish colors different parts of a command based on their roles, which can improve the readability of commands. It also helps us to spot errors with their unique colors.
Fish also provides scripting, tab completion, and command history functionality like the shells mentioned in this task.

Z Shell--
Z Shell (Zsh) is not installed by default in most Linux distributions. It is considered a modern shell that combines the functionalities of some previous shells. Some of the key features provided by zsh are listed below:
Zsh provides advanced tab completion and is also capable of writing scripts.
Just like fish, it also provides auto spell correction for the commands.
It offers extensive customization that may make it slower than other shells.
It also provides tab completion, command history functionality, and several other features.

Shell Scripting and components---
A shell script is nothing but a set of commands. Suppose a repetitive task requires you to enter multiple commands using a shell. Instead of entering them one after one on every repetition of that task, which may take more of your time, you can combine them into a script. To execute all those commands, you will only execute the script, and all the commands will be executed
Unlike the other commands we type in the shell, we first need to create a file using any text editor for the script. The file must be named with an extension .sh, the default extension for bash scripts
Every script should start from shebang. Shebang is a combination of some characters that are added at the beginning of a script, starting with #! followed by the name of the interpreter to use while executing the script.ex- #!/bin/bash.
Variables--
A variable stores a value inside it. Suppose you need to use some complex values, like a URL, a file path, etc., several times in your script. Instead of memorizing and writing them repeatedly, you can store them in a variable and use the variable name wherever you need it.
The script below displays a string on the screen: "Hey, what’s your name?” This is done by echo command. The second line of the script contains the code read name. read is used to take input from the user, and name is the variable in which the input would be stored. The last line uses echo to display the welcome line for the user, along with its name stored in the variable.
To execute the script, we first need to make sure that the script has execution permissions. To give these permissions to the script, we can type the following command in our terminal
chmod +x first_script.sh
Now that the script has execution permissions use ./ before the script name to execute it.
If you don't define ./ before the script name, the shell will search the script in the PATH environment variable (that contains all the directories except the current one), and it will not find the defined script in any of those directories and generate an error.
Loops--
Loop, as the name suggests, is something that is repeating.
for i in {1..10};
do
echo $i
done
The first line has the variable i that will iterate from 1 to 10 and execute the below code every time. 
Do indicates the start of the loop code, and done indicates the end. In between them, the code we want to execute in the loop is to be written. The for loop will take each number in the brackets and assign it to the variable i in each iteration. The echo $i will display this variable’s value every iteration.
Conditional Statements--
Conditional statements are an essential part of scripting. They help you execute a specific code only when a condition is satisfied; otherwise, you can execute another code.
# Defining the Interpreter 
#!/bin/bash
echo "Please enter your name first:"
read name
if [ "$name" = "Stewart" ]; then
        echo "Welcome Stewart! Here is the secret: THM_Script"
else
        echo "Sorry! You are not authorized to access the secret."
fi
The above script takes the user’s name as input and stores it into a variable (studied in the Variables section). The conditional statement starts with if and compares the value of that variable with the string Stewart;
if it’s a match, it will display the secret to the user, or else it will not. The fi is used to end the condition
Comments--
A comment is a sentence that we write in our code just for the sake of our understanding. It is written with a # sign followed by a space and the sentence you need to write. 




















































