What is SSH & how Does it Work?
Secure Shell or SSH simply is a protocol between devices in an encrypted form. Using cryptography, any input we send in a human-readable format is encrypted for travelling over a network -- where it is then unencrypted once it reaches the remote machine.

Using SSH to Login to Your Linux Machine - 
1. To login the command used is ssh and then the username of the account , @ the ip address of the machine .
2. For example: ssh tryhackme@10.49.153.99 after this we have to access the password to the account .The password for this account was tryhackme after -
this any command we enter it will execute on the remote machine.

Introduction to flags and switches -
1.ls list and -a (-all) shows hidden files with .in front of the hidden files.
2. To access manual page for commands input man and then the command name ex- man ls .
3. We use -h flag to access output in human readable format .

Some commands for file managemaent -
touch - to create file.
mkdir (make directory) - to make directory .
cp - to copy (cp note note2 - copy note into note2 file).
mv- to move (same as cp).
rm - to remove (have to use rm -R to remove directory).
file - to determine file type.

Permission 101 -
To switch between users two things are required.
1. The user we wish to switch to and password of the user.
when using su to switch to "user2", our new session drops us into our previous user's home directory.  
Where now, after using -l, our new session has dropped us into the home directory of "user" automatically. 

Understanding File Permissions in Numeric Format
First 3 - owner  (rwx)
Next 3 - group  (rwx)
Last 3 - others (rwx)
Each permission has a numeric value:
Read(r) - 4
write(w) - 2
execute(x) - 1
rwxrwxrwx = 777
More Common Examples
rwxr-xr-x	755	Owner can do everything, others can read and execute
rw-r--r--	644	Owner can read/write, others can only read
rwx------	700	Only the owner has access
Understanding numeric permissions is important because:

Many Linux commands use numeric values (e.g. chmod 755 file)
You can quickly identify security risks
You can control who can access sensitive files
For example:

chmod 750 system_overview.txt
This means:

Owner: full access
Group: read + execute
Others: no access

Common Directories-
/etc - The etc folder (short for etcetera) is a commonplace location to store system files that are used by your operating system.
the "passwd" and "shadow" files. These two files are special for Linux as they show how your system stores the passwords for each user in encrypted formatting called sha512
/var (does caching)- one of the main root folders found on a Linux install. This folder stores data that is frequently accessed or written by services or applications running on the system.
/root - Unlike the /home directory, the /root folder is actually the home for the "root" system user
/tmp - the /tmp directory is volatile and is used to store data that is only needed to be accessed once or twice. After restarting the computer it clears out.








  

