Types of logs---
Log Type	Usage	Example
System Logs	The system logs can be helpful in troubleshooting running issues in the OS. These logs provide information on various operating system activities.	- System Startup and shutdown events
- Driver Loading events
- System Error events
- Hardware events
Security Logs	The security logs help detect and investigate incidents. These logs provide information on the security-related activities in the system.	-Authentication events
- Authorization events
- Security Policy changes events
- User Account changes events - Abnormal Activity events
Application Logs	The application logs contain specific events related to the application. Any interactive or non-interactive activity happening inside the application will be logged here.	- User Interaction events
- Application Changes events
- Application Update events
- Application Error events
Audit Logs	The Audit logs provide detailed information on the system changes and user events. These logs are helpful for compliance requirements and can play a vital role in security monitoring as well.	- Data Access events
- System Change events
- User Activity events
- Policy Enforcement events
Network Logs	Network logs provide information on the network’s outgoing and incoming traffic. They play crucial roles in troubleshooting network issues and can also be handy during incident investigations.	- Incoming Network Traffic events
- Outgoing Network Traffic events
- Network Connection Logs - Network Firewall Logs
Access Logs	The Access logs provide detailed information about the access to different resources. These resources can be of different types, providing us with information on their access.	- Webserver Access Logs
- Database Access Logs - Application Access Logs
- API Access Logs

Windows Event logs analysis---
Some of the crucial types of logs stored in a Windows Operating System are:
Application: There are many applications running on the operating system. Any information related to those applications is logged into this file. This information includes errors, warnings, compatibility issues, etc.
System: The operating system itself has different running operations. Any information related to these operations is logged in the System log file. This information includes driver issues, hardware issues, system startup and shutdown information, services information, etc.
Security: This is the most important log file in Windows OS in terms of security. It logs all security-related activities, including user authentication, changes in user accounts, security policy changes, etc.
Unlike other log files studied in the previous tasks, which had no built-in application to view them, Windows OS has a utility known as Event Viewer, which gives a nice graphical user interface to view and search for anything in these logs.
To open Event Viewer, click on the Start button of Windows and type ‘Event Viewer’. It will open the Event Viewer for you
This is how a Windows event log looks. It has different fields. The major fields are discussed below:
Description: This field has a detailed information of the activity.
Log Name: The Log Name indicates the log file name.
Logged: This field indicates the time of the activity.
Event ID: Event IDs are unique identifiers for a specific activity.
Numerous event IDs are available in Windows event logs. We can use these event IDs to search for any specific activity. For example, event ID 4624 uniquely identifies the activity of a successful login, so you only need to search for this event ID 4624 when investigating successful logins.
Here is a table of some important Event IDs in Windows Operating System.
Event ID	Description
4624	A user account successfully logged in
4625	A user account failed to login
4634	A user account successfully logged off
4720	A user account was created
4724	An attempt was made to reset an account’s password
4722	A user account was enabled
4725	A user account was disabled
4726	A user account was deleted
Event Viewer allows us to search for the logs related to a specific event ID with its ‘Filter Current Log’ feature. We can click on this feature to apply any filter. 

Web server access logs analysis---
This log file contains all the requests made to the website along with the information on the timeframe, the IP requested, the request type, and the URL. Following are the fields taken from a sample log from an Apache web server access log file which can be found in the directory: /var/log/apache2/access.log  
IP Address: “172.16.0.1” - The IP address of the user who made the request.
Timestamp: “[06/Jun/2024:13:58:44]” - The time when the request was made to the website.
Request: The request details.
HTTP Method: “GET” - Tells the website what action to be performed on the request.
URL: “/” - The requested resource.
Status Code: “200” - The response from the server. Different numbers indicate different response results.
User-Agent: “Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_12_3) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/58.0.3029.110 Safari/537.36” - Information about the user’s Operating System, browser, etc. when making the request.
Most systems rotate the logs regularly. This rotation helps them create individual log files for specific timeframes and not carry them all in a single log file. But sometimes, we may need to combine two log files. The cat command-line utility can also be helpful in this case. We can combine the results of multiple files within one single file, as shown below.
root@kali$ cat access1.log access2.log > combined_access.log
grep is a very useful command line utility that allows you to search for strings and patterns inside a log file. For example, you may need to search if a specific IP address is present in your log file. You can do this by using the following command: The following command will search the access.log file for the string ‘192.168.1.1’ and display all the lines with this string.
root@kali$ grep "192.168.1.1" access.log
The less command is helpful for handling multiple log files. You may need to analyze specific chunks one by one. For this, you can use the less command-line utility, which helps you view one page at a time.
Use spacebar to move to the next page and b to the previous page.
After running this command, the logs would be displayed in pages, one after one, making it easy for manual analysis. If you wish to search for something in the logs, you can type / followed by the pattern you are searching for and hit enter. 
Use n to navigate to the next occurrence of your search and N to navigate to the previous occurrence of your search.

























