Windows Domain---
A Windows domain is a group of users and computers under the administration of a given business.
The main idea behind a domain is to centralise the administration of common components of a Windows computer network in a single repository called Active Directory (AD). 
The server that runs the Active Directory services is known as a Domain Controller (DC).
The main advantages of having a configured Windows domain are:
Centralised identity management: All users across the network can be configured from Active Directory with minimum effort.
Managing security policies: You can configure security policies directly from Active Directory and apply them to users and computers across the network as needed.
Real World ex- In school/university networks, you will often be provided with a username and password that you can use on any of the computers available on campus.
Your credentials are valid for all machines because whenever you input them on a machine, it will forward the authentication process back to the Active Directory, where your credentials will be checked. Thanks to Active Directory, your credentials don't need to exist in each machine and are available throughout the network.
Active Directory is also the component that allows your school/university to restrict you from accessing the control panel on your school/university machines. Policies will usually be deployed throughout the network so that you don't have administrative privileges over those computers.

Active Directory---
The core of any Windows Domain is the Active Directory Domain Service (AD DS). This service acts as a catalogue that holds the information of all of the "objects" that exist on your network.
Amongst the many objects supported by AD, we have users, groups, machines, printers, shares and many others.
Users are one of the most common object types in Active Directory. Users are one of the objects known as security principals, meaning that they can be authenticated by the domain and can be assigned privileges over resources like files or printers. You could say that a security principal is an object that can act upon resources in the network.
Users can be used to represent two types of entities:
People: users will generally represent persons in your organisation that need to access the network, like employees.
Services: you can also define users to be used by services like IIS or MSSQL. Every single service requires a user to run, but service users are different from regular users as they will only have the privileges needed to run their specific service.
Machines--
Machines are another type of object within Active Directory; for every computer that joins the Active Directory domain, a machine object will be created. Machines are also considered "security principals" and are assigned an account just as any regular user. This account has somewhat limited rights within the domain itself.
The machine accounts themselves are local administrators on the assigned computer, they are generally not supposed to be accessed by anyone except the computer itself, but as with any other account, if you have the password, you can use it to log in.
Machine Account passwords are automatically rotated out and are generally comprised of 120 random characters.
Identifying machine accounts is relatively easy. They follow a specific naming scheme. The machine account name is the computer's name followed by a dollar sign. For example, a machine named DC01 will have a machine account called DC01$.
Security groups--
Security groups are also considered security principals and, therefore, can have privileges over resources on the network.
Domain Admins -	Users of this group have administrative privileges over the entire domain. By default, they can administer any computer on the domain, including the DCs.
Server Operators	- Users in this group can administer Domain Controllers. They cannot change any administrative group memberships.
Backup Operators - Users in this group are allowed to access any file, ignoring their permissions. They are used to perform backups of data on computers.
Account Operators -	Users in this group can create or modify other accounts in the domain.
Domain Users -	Includes all existing user accounts in the domain.
Domain Computers -	Includes all existing computers in the domain.
Domain Controllers -	Includes all existing DCs on the domain.









































