DNS(Domain Name System):Remembering Addresses---
DNS operates at the Application Layer, i.e., Layer 7 of the ISO OSI model. DNS traffic uses UDP port 53 by default and TCP port 53 as a default fallback. There are many types of DNS records; however, in this task, we will focus on the following four:
A record: The A (Address) record maps a hostname to one or more IPv4 addresses. For example, you can set example.com to resolve to 172.17.2.172.
AAAA Record: The AAAA record is similar to the A Record, but it is for IPv6. Remember that it is AAAA (quad-A), as AA and AAA would refer to a battery size; furthermore, AAA refers to Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting; neither falls under DNS.
CNAME Record: The CNAME (Canonical Name) record maps a domain name to another domain name. For example, www.example.com can be mapped to example.com or even to example.org.
MX Record: The MX (Mail Exchange) record specifies the mail server responsible for handling emails for a domain.
when you type example.com in your browser, your browser tries to resolve this domain name by querying the DNS server for the A record. However, when you try to send an email to test@example.com, the mail server would query the DNS server to find the MX record.
If you want to look up the IP address of a domain from the command line, you can use a tool such as nslookup

WHOIS---
we covered how a domain name is resolved into an IP address. However, for this to happen, someone needs to have the authority to set the A, AAAA, and MX records, among other DNS records for the domain. Whoever registers a domain name is granted this power. Therefore, if you register example.com, you can set any valid DNS records for example.com.
You can register any available domain name for one or more years. You need to pay the annual fee, and you are required to provide accurate contact information(opens in new tab) as the registrant. This information is part of the data available via WHOIS records and is available publicly. (Although written in uppercase, WHOIS is not an acronym; 
It is pronounced who is.) However, don’t worry if you want to register a domain without revealing your contact information publicly; you can use one of the privacy services that hide all your information from the WHOIS records.
You can look up the WHOIS records of any registered domain name using one of the online services or via the command-line tool whois, available on Linux systems, among others. As expected, a WHOIS record provides information about the entity that registered a domain name, including name, phone number, email, and address. In the screenshot shown below, you can see when the record was first created and when it was last updated

HTTP(S):Accesing the web---
When you fire up your browser, you mainly use HTTP and HTTPS protocols. HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol; the S in HTTPS stands for Secure. This protocol relies on TCP and defines how your web browser communicates with the web servers
GET retrieves data from a server, such as an HTML file or an image.
POST allows us to submit new data to the server, such as submitting a form or uploading a file.
PUT is used to create a new resource on the server and to update and overwrite existing information.
DELETE, as the name suggests, is used to delete a specified file or resource on the server.
HTTP and HTTPS commonly use TCP ports 80 and 443, respectively, and less commonly other ports such as 8080 and 8443.
Using Wireshark, we can examine the exchange between the Firefox browser and the web server more closely.
Wireshark shows the text sent by our browser in red and the web server response in blue. As you can tell, a lot of information is exchanged between the client and the server that does not get rendered to the user.

FTP(File Transfer Protocol)---
Unlike HTTP, which is designed to retrieve web pages, File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is designed to transfer files. As a result, FTP is very efficient for file transfer, and when all conditions are equal, it can achieve higher speeds than HTTP.
Example commands defined by the FTP protocol are:
USER is used to input the username
PASS is used to enter the password
RETR (retrieve) is used to download a file from the FTP server to the client.
STOR (store) is used to upload a file from the client to the FTP server
FTP server listens on TCP port 21 by default; data transfer is conducted via another connection from the client to the server.
We used Wireshark to examine the exchanged messages more closely. The client’s messages are in red, while the server’s responses are in blue.
Notice how various commands differ between the client and the server. For example, when you type ls on the client, the client sends LIST to the server. One last thing to note is that the directory listing and the file we downloaded are sent over a separate connection each

SMTP(Simple Mail Transfer Protocol):Sending mail---
some of the commands used by your mail client when it transfers an email to an SMTP server:
HELO or EHLO initiates an SMTP session
MAIL FROM specifies the sender’s email address
RCPT TO specifies the recipient’s email address
DATA indicates that the client will begin sending the content of the email message
. is sent on a line by itself to indicate the end of the email message
 Obviously, sending an email using telnet is quite cumbersome; however, it helps you better understand the commands that your email client issues under the hood. 
The Wireshark capture shows the exchange in colours; the client’s messages are in red, while the server’s responses are in blue.

POP3(Post Office Protocol Version-3):Receiving mails---
The Post Office Protocol version 3 (POP3) is designed to allow the client to communicate with a mail server and retrieve email messages.
Without going into in-depth technical details, an email client sends its messages by relying on SMTP and retrieves them using POP3. 
SMTP is similar to handing your envelope or package to the post office, and POP3 is similar to checking your local mailbox for new letters or packages.
Some common POP3 commands are:
USER <username> identifies the user
PASS <password> provides the user’s password
STAT requests the number of messages and total size
LIST lists all messages and their sizes
RETR <message_number> retrieves the specified message
DELE <message_number> marks a message for deletion
QUIT ends the POP3 session applying changes, such as deletions
he POP3 server listens on TCP port 110 by default
Someone capturing the network packets would be able to intercept the exchanged traffic

IMAP(Internet Message Access Protocol):Synchronising Mail---
POP3 is enough when working from one device, e.g., your favourite email client on your desktop computer.
However, what if you want to check your email from your office desktop computer and from your laptop or smartphone? In this scenario, you need a protocol that allows synchronization of messages instead of deleting a message after retrieving it.
One solution to maintaining a synchronized mailbox across multiple devices is Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP).
IMAP allows synchronizing read, moved, and deleted messages. IMAP is quite convenient when you check your email via multiple clients. Unlike POP3, which tends to minimize server storage as email is downloaded and deleted from the remote server, 
IMAP tends to use more storage as email is kept on the server and synchronized across the email clients
The IMAP protocol commands are more complicated than the POP3 protocol commands. We list a few examples below:
LOGIN <username> <password> authenticates the user
SELECT <mailbox> selects the mailbox folder to work with
FETCH <mail_number> <data_item_name> Example fetch 3 body[] to fetch message number 3, header and body.
MOVE <sequence_set> <mailbox> moves the specified messages to another mailbox
COPY <sequence_set> <data_item_name> copies the specified messages to another mailbox
LOGOUT logs out
the IMAP server listens on TCP port 143 by default






