OSI model---
Open systems Interconnection model- is a conceptual model developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that describes how communications should occur in a computer network.
The OSI model is composed of seven layers:
Physical Layer
Data Link Layer
Network Layer
Transport Layer
Session Layer
Presentation Layer
Application Layer
Layer 1: Physical Layer
The physical layer, also referred to as layer 1, deals with the physical connection between devices; this includes the medium, such as a wire, and the definition of the binary digits 0 and 1. Data transmission can be via an electrical, optical, or wireless signal. Consequently, we need data cables or antennas, depending on our physical medium.
Layer 2: Data Link Layer
The data link layer describes an agreement between the different systems on the same network segment on how to communicate.
A network segment refers to a group of networked devices using a shared medium or channel for information transfer.
Examples of layer 2 include Ethernet, i.e., 802.3, and WiFi, i.e., 802.11.
Ethernet and WiFi addresses are six bytes. Their address is called a MAC address.
We expect to see two MAC addresses in each frame in real network communication over Ethernet or WiFi. The packet in the screenshot below shows:
The destination data-link address (MAC address) highlighted in yellow
The source data link address (MAC address) is highlighted in blue
The remaining bits show the data being sent
Layer 3: Network Layer
The data link layer focuses on sending data between two nodes on the same network segment. 
The network layer, i.e., layer 3, is concerned with sending data between different networks.
In more technical terms, the network layer handles logical addressing and routing, i.e., finding a path to transfer the network packets between the diverse networks.
In the data link layer, we gave an example of one company office with ten computers, where the data link layer is responsible for providing a connection between them. Let’s say that this company has multiple offices distributed across various cities, countries, or even continents. 
The network layer is responsible for connecting the different offices together.
Examples of the network layer include Internet Protocol (IP), Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), and Virtual Private Network (VPN) protocols such as IPSec and SSL/TLS VPN.
Layer 4: Transport Layer
Layer 4, the transport layer, enables end-to-end communication between running applications on different hosts. Your web browser is connected to the TryHackMe web server over the transport layer, which can support various functions like flow control, segmentation, and error correction.
Examples of layer 4 are Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP).
Layer 5: Session Layer
The session layer is responsible for establishing, maintaining, and synchronising communication between applications running on different hosts.
Establishing a session means initiating communication between applications and negotiating the necessary parameters for the session. Data synchronisation ensures that data is transmitted in the correct order and provides mechanisms for recovery in case of transmission failures.
Examples of the session layer are Network File System (NFS) and Remote Procedure Call (RPC).
Layer 6: Presentation Layer
The presentation layer ensures the data is delivered in a form the application layer can understand. Layer 6 handles data encoding, compression, and encryption. An example of encoding is character encoding, such as ASCII or Unicode.
Various standards are used at the presentation layer.
Layer 7: Application Layer
The application layer provides network services directly to end-user applications. Your web browser would use the HTTP protocol to request a file, submit a form, or upload a file.
The application layer is the top layer, and you might have encountered many of its protocols as you use different applications. Examples of Layer 7 protocols are HTTP, FTP, DNS, POP3, SMTP, and IMAP.

TCP/IP Model---
TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol and was developed in the 1970s by the Department of Defense (DoD). 
Application Layer: The OSI model application, presentation and session layers, i.e., layers 5, 6, and 7, are grouped into the application layer in the TCP/IP model.
Transport Layer: This is layer 4.
Internet Layer: This is layer 3. The OSI model’s network layer is called the Internet layer in the TCP/IP model.
Link Layer: This is layer 2.

IP Addresses and Subnets---
Every host on the network needs a unique identifier for other hosts to communicate with him. Without a unique identifier, the host cannot be found without ambiguity. When using the TCP/IP protocol suite, we need to assign an IP address for each device connected to the network.
An IP address comprises four octets, i.e., 32 bits. Being 8 bits, an octet allows us to represent a decimal number between 0 and 255.
You can look up your IP address on the MS Windows command line using the command ipconfig. On Linux and UNIX-based systems, you can issue the command ifconfig or ip address show, which can be typed as ip a s
If you are wondering, a subnet mask of 255.255.255.0 can also be written as /24. The /24 means that the leftmost 24 bits within the IP address do not change across the network, i.e., the subnet.
there are two types of IP addresses:
Public IP addresses
Private IP addresses
For a private IP address to access the Internet, the router must have a public IP address and must support Network Address Translation (NAT).
RFC 1918 defines the following three ranges of private IP addresses:
10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255 (10/8)
172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255 (172.16/12)
192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255 (192.168/16
Routing--
A router forwards data packets to the proper network. Usually, a data packet passes through multiple routers before it reaches its final destination. The router functions at layer 3, inspecting the IP address and forwarding the packet to the best network (router) so the packet gets closer to its destination

UDP and TCP---
The IP protocol allows us to reach a destination host on the network; the host is identified by its IP address. We need protocols that would enable processes on networked hosts to communicate with each other. There are two transport protocols to achieve that: UDP and TCP.
UDP (User Datagram Protocol) allows us to reach a specific process on this target host. UDP is a simple connectionless protocol that operates at the transport layer, i.e., layer 4. Being connectionless means that it does not need to establish a connection. UDP does not even provide a mechanism to know that the packet has been delivered
An IP address identifies the host; we need a mechanism to determine the sending and receiving process. This can be achieved by using port numbers. A port number uses two octets; consequently, it ranges between 1 and 65535; port 0 is reserved. (The number 65535 is calculated by the expression 216 − 1.)
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) is a connection-oriented transport protocol. It uses various mechanisms to ensure reliable data delivery sent by the different processes on the networked hosts. Like UDP, it is a layer 4 protocol. Being connection-oriented, it requires the establishment of a TCP connection before any data can be sent.
In TCP, each data octet has a sequence number; this makes it easy for the receiver to identify lost or duplicated packets. The receiver, on the other hand, acknowledges the reception of data with an acknowledgement number specifying the last received octet
A TCP connection is established using what’s called a three-way handshake. Two flags are used: SYN (Synchronise) and ACK (Acknowledgment). The packets are sent as follows:
SYN Packet: The client initiates the connection by sending a SYN packet to the server. This packet contains the client’s randomly chosen initial sequence number.
SYN-ACK Packet: The server responds to the SYN packet with a SYN-ACK packet, which adds the initial sequence number randomly chosen by the server.
ACK Packet: The three-way handshake is completed as the client sends an ACK packet to acknowledge the reception of the SYN-ACK packet.

Encapsulation---
encapsulation refers to the process of every layer adding a header (and sometimes a trailer) to the received unit of data and sending the “encapsulated” unit to the layer below.
Application data: It all starts when the user inputs the data they want to send into the application. For example, you write an email or an instant message and hit the send button. The application formats this data and starts sending it according to the application protocol used, using the layer below it, the transport layer.
Transport protocol segment or datagram: The transport layer, such as TCP or UDP, adds the proper header information and creates the TCP segment (or UDP datagram). This segment is sent to the layer below it, the network layer.
Network packet: The network layer, i.e. the Internet layer, adds an IP header to the received TCP segment or UDP datagram. Then, this IP packet is sent to the layer below it, the data link layer.
Data link frame: The Ethernet or WiFi receives the IP packet and adds the proper header and trailer, creating a frame.
We start with application data. At the transport layer, we add a TCP or UDP header to create a TCP segment or UDP datagram. Again, at the network layer, we add the proper IP header to get an IP packet that can be routed over the Internet. Finally, we add the appropriate header and trailer to get a WiFi or Ethernet frame at the link layer.
The Life of a Packet--
On the TryHackMe search page, you enter your search query and hit enter.
Your web browser, using HTTPS, prepares an HTTP request and pushes it to the layer below it, the transport layer.
The TCP layer needs to establish a connection via a three-way handshake between your browser and the TryHackMe web server. After establishing the TCP connection, it can send the HTTP request containing the search query. Each TCP segment created is sent to the layer below it, the Internet layer.
The IP layer adds the source IP address, i.e., your computer, and the destination IP address, i.e., the IP address of the TryHackMe web server. For this packet to reach the router, your laptop delivers it to the layer below it, the link layer.
Depending on the protocol, The link layer adds the proper link layer header and trailer, and the packet is sent to the router.
The router removes the link layer header and trailer, inspects the IP destination, among other fields, and routes the packet to the proper link. Each router repeats this process until it reaches the router of the target server.
The steps will then be reversed as the packet reaches the router of the destination network

Telnet---
The TELNET (Teletype Network) protocol is a network protocol for remote terminal connection. In simpler words, telnet, a TELNET client, allows you to connect to and communicate with a remote system and issue text commands. Although initially it was used for remote administration, we can use telnet to connect to any server listening on a TCP port number.
Echo server: This server echoes everything you send it. By default, it listens on port 7.
Daytime server: This server listens on port 13 by default and replies with the current day and time.
Web (HTTP) server: This server listens on TCP port 80 by default and serves web pages.


