The protocols used to browse the web and access email, among others. 
These protocols work great; however, they cannot protect the confidentiality, integrity, or authenticity of the data transferred. In simpler terms, when we say that confidentiality is not protected, it means that someone watching the packets can read your password or credit card information when sent over HTTP. Similarly, they can access your private documents when sent via email. As for not protecting the integrity of the data, it means that an adversary can change the contents of the transferred data; in other words, if you authorise the payment of one hundred pounds, they can easily change it to another value, such as eight hundred pounds. Authenticity means ensuring we are talking with the correct server, not a fake one. Important online transactions are risky without ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity.
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is added to existing protocols to protect communication confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity. Consequently, HTTP, POP3, SMTP, and IMAP become HTTPS, POP3S, SMTPS, and IMAPS, where the appended “S” stands for Secure. 

TLS---
The first step for every server (or client) that needs to identify itself is to get a signed TLS certificate. Generally, the server administrator creates a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) and submits it to a Certificate Authority (CA); the CA verifies the CSR and issues a digital certificate. Once the (signed) certificate is received, it can be used to identify the server (or the client) to others, who can confirm the validity of the signature. For a host to confirm the validity of a signed certificate, the certificates of the signing authorities need to be installed on the host. In the non-digital world, this is similar to recognising the stamps of various authorities. 
getting a certificate signed requires paying an annual fee. However, Let’s Encrypt(opens in new tab) allows you to get your certificate signed for free.

HTTPS---
HTTP Over TLS
HTTPS stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure. It is basically HTTP over TLS. Consequently, requesting a page over HTTPS will require the following three steps (after resolving the domain name):
Establish a TCP three-way handshake with the target server
Establish a TLS session
Communicate using the HTTP protocol; for example, issue HTTP requests, such as GET / HTTP/1.1
Getting the Encryption Key---
Adding TLS to HTTP leads to all the packets being encrypted. We can no longer see the contents of the exchanged packets unless we get access to the private key. Although it is improbable that we will have access to the keys used for encryption in a TLS session, we repeated the above screenshots after providing the decryption key to Wireshark.
The TCP and TLS handshakes don’t change; the main difference starts with the HTTP protocol marked 3. For instance, we can see when the client issues a GET.
The key takeaway is that TLS offered security for HTTP without requiring any changes in the lower or higher layer protocols. In other words, TCP and IP were not modified, while HTTP was sent over TLS the way it would be sent over TCP.
SMPTS,POP3S,and IMAPS---
The secure versions, i.e., over TLS, use the following TCP port numbers by default:
Protocol	Default Port Number
HTTPS	443
SMTPS	465 and 587
POP3S	995
IMAPS	993

SSH---
The OpenBSD developers released OpenSSH, an open-source implementation of SSH. Nowadays, when you use an SSH client, it is most likely based on OpenSSH libraries and source code.
OpenSSH offers several benefits. We will list a few key points:
Secure authentication: Besides password-based authentication, SSH supports public key and two-factor authentication.
Confidentiality: OpenSSH provides end-to-end encryption, protecting against eavesdropping. Furthermore, it notifies you of new server keys to protect against man-in-the-middle attacks.
Integrity: In addition to protecting the confidentiality of the exchanged data, cryptography also protects the integrity of the traffic.
Tunneling: SSH can create a secure “tunnel” to route other protocols through SSH. This setup leads to a VPN-like connection.
X11 Forwarding: If you connect to a Unix-like system with a graphical user interface, SSH allows you to use the graphical application over the network
While the TELNET server listens on port 23, the SSH server listens on port 22.

SFTP and FTPS---
SFTP stands for SSH File Transfer Protocol and allows secure file transfer. It is part of the SSH protocol suite and shares the same port number, 22. 
If enabled in the OpenSSH server configuration, you can connect using a command such as sftp username@hostname. Once logged in, you can issue commands such as get filename and put filename to download and upload files, respectively. Generally speaking, SFTP commands are Unix-like and can differ from FTP commands.

VPN---
When the Internet was designed, the TCP/IP protocol suite focused on delivering packets. For example, if a router gets out of service, the routing protocols can adapt and pick a different route to send their packets. If a packet was not acknowledged, TCP has built-in mechanisms to detect this situation and resend. However, no mechanisms are in place to ensure that all data leaving or entering a computer is protected from disclosure and alteration. 
A popular solution was the setup of a VPN connection. The focus here is on the P for Private in VPN.
Almost all companies require “private” information exchange in their virtual network. So, a VPN provides a very convenient and relatively inexpensive solution. The main requirements are Internet connectivity and a VPN server and client.
Once a VPN tunnel is established, all our Internet traffic will usually be routed over the VPN connection, i.e. via the VPN tunnel. Consequently, when we try to access an Internet service or web application, they will not see our public IP address but the VPN server’s. This is why some Internet users connect over VPN to circumvent geographical restrictions. Furthermore, the local ISP will only see encrypted traffic, which limits its ability to censor Internet access.













