Common use of Asymmetric Encription---
Exchanging keys for symmetric encryption is a widespread use of asymmetric cryptography. Asymmetric encryption is relatively slow compared to symmetric encryption; therefore, we rely on asymmetric encryption to negotiate and agree on symmetric encryption ciphers and keys.
Imagine you have a secret code for communicating and instructions for using the secret code. The question is how you can send these instructions to your friend without anyone else being able to read them. The answer is more straightforward than it seems; you could ask your friend for a lock. Only your friend has the key for this lock, and we’ll assume you have an indestructible box you can lock with it.
If you send the instructions in a locked box to your friend, they can unlock it once it reaches them and read the instructions. After that, you can communicate using the secret code without the risk of people snooping.
In this metaphor, the secret code represents a symmetric encryption cipher and key, the lock represents the server’s public key, and the key represents the server’s private key.
Analogy	- Cryptographic System
Secret - Code	Symmetric Encryption Cipher and Key
Lock	- Public Key
Lock’s Key	- Private Key
Consequently, you would only need to use asymmetric cryptography once so that it won’t affect the speed, and then you can communicate privately using symmetric encryption.

RSA---
RSA is a public-key encryption algorithm that enables secure data transmission over insecure channels. With an insecure channel, we expect adversaries to eavesdrop on it.
The Math That Makes RSA Secure--
RSA is based on the mathematically difficult problem of factoring a large number. Multiplying two large prime numbers is a straightforward operation; however, finding the factors of a huge number takes much more computing power.
Multiplication is Polynomial (Fast): If you double the number of digits in two primes, a computer only needs roughly four times as many operations to multiply them.Factoring is Exponential (Slow): If you double the number of digits in a product, the number of steps required to factor it grows exponentially. It quickly requires more operations than there are atoms in the universe.
You need to know the main variables for RSA in CTFs: p, q, m, n, e, d, and c. As per our numerical example:
p and q are large prime numbers
n is the product of p and q
The public key is n and e
The private key is n and d
m is used to represent the original message, i.e., plaintext
c represents the encrypted text, i.e., ciphertext

Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange---
Key exchange aims to establish a shared secret between two parties. It is a method that allows two parties to establish a shared secret over an insecure communication channel without requiring a pre-existing shared secret and without an observer being able to get this key. Consequently, this shared key can be used for symmetric encryption in subsequent communications.
Consider the following scenario. Alice and Bob want to talk securely. They want to establish a shared key for symmetric cryptography but don’t want to use asymmetric cryptography for the key exchange. This is where the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange comes in.
Alice and Bob generate secrets independently; let’s call these secrets A and B. They also have some public common material; let’s call this C.
We need to make some assumptions. Firstly, whenever we combine secrets, they’re practically impossible to separate. Secondly, the order in which they’re combined doesn’t matter. Alice and Bob will combine their secrets with the common material to form AC and BC. They will then send these to each other and combine the received part with their secret to create two identical keys, both ABC. Now, they can use this key to communicate.
Alice and Bob agree on the public variables: a large prime number p and a generator g, where 0 < g < p. These values will be disclosed publicly over the communication channel. Although insecurely small, we will choose p = 29 and g = 3 to simplify our calculations.
Each party chooses a private integer. As a numerical example, Alice chooses a = 13, and Bob chooses b = 15. Each of these values represents a private key and must not be disclosed.
It is time for each party to calculate their public key using their private key from step 2 and the agreed-upon public variables from step 1. Alice calculates A = ga mod p = 313 mod 29 = 19 and Bob calculates B = gb mod p = 315 mod 29 = 26. These are the public keys.
Alice and Bob send the keys to each other. Bob receives A = ga mod p = 19, i.e., Alice’s public key. And Alice receives B = gb mod p = 26, i.e., Bob’s public key. This step is called the key exchange.
Alice and Bob can finally calculate the shared secret using the received public key and their own private key. Alice calculates Ba mod p = 2613 mod 29 = 10 and Bob calculates Ab mod p = 1915 mod 29 = 10. Both calculations yield the same result, gab mod p = 10, the shared secret key.

SSH---
If you have used an SSH client before, you would know the confirmation prompt in the terminal output below.

Terminal
root@TryHackMe# ssh 10.10.244.173
The authenticity of host '10.10.244.173 (10.10.244.173)' can't be established.
ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:lLzhZc7YzRBDchm02qTX0qsLqeeiTCJg5ipOT0E/YM8.
This key is not known by any other name.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added '10.10.244.173' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
In the above interaction, the SSH client confirms whether we recognise the server’s public key fingerprint. ED25519 is the public-key algorithm used for digital signature generation and verification in this example. Our SSH client didn’t recognise this key and is asking us to confirm whether we want to continue with the connection. This warning is because a man-in-the-middle attack is probable; a malicious server might have intercepted the connection and replied, pretending to be the target server.
In this case, the user must authenticate the server, i.e., confirm the server’s identity by checking the public key signature. Once you answer with “yes”, the SSH client will record this public key signature for this host. In the future, it will connect you silently unless this host replies with a different public key
Authenticating the Client--
Now that we have confirmed that we are talking with the correct server, we need to identify ourselves and get authenticated. In many cases, SSH users are authenticated using usernames and passwords like you would log in to a physical machine. However, considering the inherent issues with passwords, this does not fall within the best security practices.
At some point, one will surely hit a machine with SSH configured with key authentication instead. This authentication uses public and private keys to prove the client is a valid and authorised user on the server. By default, SSH keys are RSA keys. You can choose which algorithm to generate and add a passphrase to encrypt the SSH key.
ssh-keygen is the program usually used to generate key pairs. It supports various algorithms, as shown on its manual page below
root@TryHackMe# man ssh-keygen
[...]
-t dsa | ecdsa | ecdsa-sk | ed25519 | ed25519-sk | rsa
Specifies the type of key to create. The possible values are “dsa”, “ecdsa”, “ecdsa-sk”, “ed25519”, “ed25519-sk”, or “rsa”.
[...]
DSA (Digital Signature Algorithm) is a public-key cryptography algorithm specifically designed for digital signatures.
ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) is a variant of DSA that uses elliptic curve cryptography to provide smaller key sizes for equivalent security.
ECDSA-SK (ECDSA with Security Key) is an extension of ECDSA. It incorporates hardware-based security keys for enhanced private key protection.
Ed25519 is a public-key signature system using EdDSA (Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm) with Curve25519.
Ed25519-SK (Ed25519 with Security Key) is a variant of Ed25519. Similar to ECDSA-SK, it uses a hardware-based security key for improved private key protection.
Let’s generate a key pair with the default options.

Terminal
root@TryHackMe# ssh-keygen -t ed25519
Generating public/private ed25519 key pair.
Enter file in which to save the key (/home/strategos/.ssh/id_ed25519): 
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): 
Enter same passphrase again: 
Your identification has been saved in /home/strategos/.ssh/id_ed25519
Your public key has been saved in /home/strategos/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub
The key fingerprint is:
SHA256:4S4DQvRfp52UuNwg++nTcWlnITEJTbMcCU0N8UYC1do strategos@g5000
The key's random art image is:
+--[ED25519 256]--+
|  .       +XXB.  |
| . .     . oBBo  |
|  . . . = + o=o  |
| .   . * X .o.E  |
|  . . o S +  o . |
|   . . o .. + o  |
|      o +. + o   |
|       +. .      |
|        ..       |
+----[SHA256]-----+
In the above example, we didn’t use a passphrase to show you the content of the private key. Let’s look at the generated public key, id_ed25519.pub, and the generated private key, id_ed25519.

Terminal
strategos@g5000:~/.ssh$ cat id_ed25519.pub 
ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAINqNMqNhpXZGt6T8Q8bOplyTeldfWq3T3RyNJTmTMJq9 strategos@g5000
strategos@g5000:~/.ssh$ cat id_ed25519
-----BEGIN OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
b3BlbnNzaC1rZXktdjEAAAAABG5vbmUAAAAEbm9uZQAAAAAAAAABAAAAMwAAAAtzc2gtZW
QyNTUxOQAAACDajTKjYaV2Rrek/EPGzqZck3pXX1qt090cjSU5kzCavQAAAJA+E+ajPhPm
owAAAAtzc2gtZWQyNTUxOQAAACDajTKjYaV2Rrek/EPGzqZck3pXX1qt090cjSU5kzCavQ
AAAEB981T2ngdoNm8gEzRU35bGHofqRMjfo5egxl0/9fap/NqNMqNhpXZGt6T8Q8bOplyT
eldfWq3T3RyNJTmTMJq9AAAACm9xYWJAZzUwMDABAgM=
-----END OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
Note that the private key is shared above for demonstration purposes and was purged afterwards. Sharing a private key would be the most insecure act anyone can commit against their security. On another note, had we used -t rsa, the resulting keys would have been much longer.
SSH Private Keys--
As just mentioned, you should treat your private SSH keys like passwords. Never share them under any circumstances; they’re called private keys for a reason. Someone with your private key can log in to servers that accept it, i.e., include it among the authorised keys, unless the key is encrypted with a passphrase.
It’s very important to mention that the passphrase used to decrypt the private key doesn’t identify you to the server at all; it only decrypts the SSH private key. The passphrase is never transmitted and never leaves your system.
Using tools like John the Ripper, you can attack an encrypted SSH key to attempt to find the passphrase, highlighting the importance of using a complex passphrase and keeping your private key private.
When generating an SSH key to log in to a remote machine, you should generate the keys on your machine and then copy the public key over, as this means the private key never exists on the lab machine using ssh-copy-id. However, this doesn’t matter as much for temporary keys generated to access CTF boxes.
The permissions must be set up correctly to use a private SSH key; otherwise, your SSH client will ignore the file with a warning. Only the owner should be able to read or write to the private key (600 or stricter). ssh -i privateKeyFileName user@host is how you specify a key for the standard Linux OpenSSH client.
Keys Trusted by the Remote Host
The ~/.ssh folder is the default place to store these keys for OpenSSH. The authorized_keys (note the US English spelling) file in this directory holds public keys that are allowed access to the server if key authentication is enabled. By default on many Linux distributions, key authentication is enabled as it is more secure than using a password to authenticate. Only key authentication should be accepted if you want to allow SSH access for the root user.
Using SSH Keys to Get a “Better Shell”
During CTFs, penetration testing, and red teaming exercises, SSH keys are an excellent way to “upgrade” a reverse shell, assuming the user has login enabled. Note that www-data usually does not allow this, but regular users and root will work. Leaving an SSH key in the authorized_keys file on a machine can be a useful backdoor, and you don’t need to deal with any of the issues of unstabilised reverse shells like Control-C or lack of tab completion

Digital signatures and Certificates---
What’s a Digital Signature?
Digital signatures provide a way to verify the authenticity and integrity of a digital message or document. Proving the authenticity of files means we know who created or modified them. Using asymmetric cryptography, you produce a signature with your private key, which can be verified using your public key. Only you should have access to your private key, which proves you signed the file. In many modern countries, digital and physical signatures have the same legal value.
The simplest form of digital signature is encrypting the document with your private key. If someone wants to verify this signature, they would decrypt it with your public key and check if the files match. This process is shown in the image below.
Bob encrypts a hash of his document and shares it with Alice, along with the original document. Alice can decrypt the encrypted hash and compare it with the hash of the file she received. This approach proves the document’s integrity, unlike pasting a fancy image of a signature.
Certificates: Prove Who You Are!
Certificates are an essential application of public key cryptography, and they are also linked to digital signatures. A common place where they’re used is for HTTPS. How does your web browser know that the server you’re talking to is the real tryhackme.com?
The answer lies in certificates. The web server has a certificate that says it is the real tryhackme.com. The certificates have a chain of trust, starting with a root CA (Certificate Authority). From install time, your device, operating system, and web browser automatically trust various root CAs. Certificates are trusted only when the Root CAs say they trust the organisation that signed them. In a way, it is a chain; for example, the certificate is signed by an organisation, the organisation is trusted by a CA, and the CA is trusted by your browser. Therefore, your browser trusts the certificate. In general, there are long chains of trust

PGP ans GPG---
PGP stands for Pretty Good Privacy. It’s software that implements encryption for encrypting files, performing digital signing, and more. GnuPG or GPG(opens in new tab) is an open-source implementation of the OpenPGP standard.
GPG is commonly used in email to protect the confidentiality of the email messages. Furthermore, it can be used to sign an email message and confirm its integrity.
Below is an example of generating GPG. You are asked about the purpose of using gpg, whether signing only or signing and encrypting. Besides selecting the cryptographic algorithm, we needed to choose an expiry date for the generated key. Finally, we provided some information about us: our name, email address, and a comment usually about the purpose of this key.
Terminal
gpg --full-gen-key
gpg (GnuPG) 2.4.4; Copyright (C) 2024 g10 Code GmbH
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
Please select what kind of key you want:
   (1) RSA and RSA
   (2) DSA and Elgamal
   (3) DSA (sign only)
   (4) RSA (sign only)
   (9) ECC (sign and encrypt) *default*
  (10) ECC (sign only)
  (14) Existing key from card
Your selection? 9
Please select which elliptic curve you want:
   (1) Curve 25519 *default*
   (4) NIST P-384
   (6) Brainpool P-256
Your selection? 1
Please specify how long the key should be valid.
         0 = key does not expire
      <n>  = key expires in n days
      <n>w = key expires in n weeks
      <n>m = key expires in n months
      <n>y = key expires in n years
Key is valid for? (0) 
Key does not expire at all
Is this correct? (y/N) y
GnuPG needs to construct a user ID to identify your key.
Real name: strategos
Email address: strategos@tryhackme.thm
[...]
pub   ed25519 2024-08-29 [SC]
      AB7E6AA87B6A8E0D159CA7FFE5E63DBD5F83D5ED
uid                      Strategos <strategos@tryhackme.thm>
sub   cv25519 2024-08-29 [E]
You may need to use GPG to decrypt files in CTFs. With PGP/GPG, private keys can be protected with passphrases in a similar way that we protect SSH private keys. If the key is passphrase protected, you can attempt to crack it using John the Ripper and gpg2john.
Now that you have your GPG key pair, you can share the public key with your contacts. Whenever your contacts want to communicate securely, they encrypt their messages to you using your public key. To decrypt the message, you will have to use your private key. Due to the importance of the GPG keys, it is vital that you keep a backup copy in a secure location.
Let’s say you got a new computer. All you need to do is import your key, and you can start decrypting your received messages again:
You would use gpg --import backup.key to import your key from backup.key
To decrypt your messages, you need to issue gpg --decrypt confidential_message.gpg

Cryptography is the science of securing communication and data using codes and ciphers.
Cryptanalysis is the study of methods to break or bypass cryptographic security systems without knowing the key.
Brute-Force Attack is an attack method that involves trying every possible key or password to decrypt a message.
Dictionary Attack is an attack method where the attacker tries dictionary words or combinations of them.














































































