Different type of databases ---
1. Relational databases (SQL)
2. Non-Relational databases (NoSQL)
Relational databases: Store structured data, meaning the data inserted into this database follows a structure. For example, the data collected on a user consists of first_name, last_name, email_address, username and password. When a new user joins, an entry is made in the database following this structure. This structured data is stored in rows and columns in a table (all of which will be covered shortly); relationships can then be made between two or more tables (for example, user and order_history), hence the term relational databases
Non-relational databases: Instead of storing data the above way, store data in a non-tabular format. For example, if documents are being scanned, which can contain varying types and quantities of data, and are stored in a database that calls for a non-tabular format. Here is an example of what that might look like: 
 {
    _id: ObjectId("4556712cd2b2397ce1b47661"),
    name: { first: "Thomas", last: "Anderson" },
    date_of_birth: new Date('Sep 2, 1964'),
    occupation: [ "The One"],
    steps_taken : NumberLong(4738947387743977493)
}
In terms of what database should be chosen, it always comes down to the context in which the database is going to be used. Relational databases are often used when the data being stored is reliably going to be received in a consistent format, where accuracy is important, such as when processing e-commerce transactions. Non-relational databases, on the other hand, are better used when the data being received can vary greatly in its format but need to be collected and organised in the same place, such as social media platforms collecting user-generated content.
Primary and Foreign Keys--
Once a table has been defined and populated, more data may need to be stored. For instance, we want to create a table named “Authors” that stores the authors of the books sold in the store. Here is a very clear example of a relationship. A book (stored in the Books table) is written by an author (stored in the Authors table). If we wanted to query for a book in our story but also have the author of that book returned, our data would need to be related somehow; we do this with keys. There are two types of keys:
Primary Keys: A primary key is used to ensure that the data collected in a certain column is unique. That is, there needs to be a way to identify each record stored in a table, a value unique to that record and is not repeated by any other record in that table. Think about matriculation numbers in a university; these are numbers assigned to a student so they can be uniquely identified in records (as sometimes students can have the same name). A column has to be chosen in each table as a primary key; in our example, “id” would make the most sense as an id has been uniquely created for each book where, as books can have the same publication date or (in rarer cases) book title. Note that there can only be one primary key column in a table.
Foreign Keys: A foreign key is a column (or columns) in a table that also exists in another table within the database, and therefore provides a link between the two tables. In our example, think about adding an “author_id” field to our “Books” table; this would then act as a foreign key because the author_id in our Books table corresponds to the “id” column in the author table. Foreign keys are what allow the relationships between different tables in relational databases. Note that there can be more than one foreign key column in a table


















































