SQL injection vulnerability---
Let’s take an example of a login page that asks you to enter your username and password to log in. Let’s provide it with the following data:
Username: John
Password: Un@detectable444
Once you enter your username and password, the website will receive it, make an SQL query with your credentials, and send it to the database. 
SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = 'John' AND password = 'Un@detectable444';
This query will be executed in the database. As per this query, the database will check for a user named John and the password of Un@detectable444. If it finds such a user, it will return the user’s details to the application. Note that the above query will be successful only if the given user and pass both have a match together in the database as they are separated by the boolean “AND”.
Sometimes, when input is improperly sanitized, meaning that user input is not validated, attackers can manipulate the input and write SQL queries that would get executed in the database and perform the attacker’s desired actions. SQL injection has a very harmful effect in this digital world as all organizations store their data, including their critical information, inside the databases, and a successful SQL injection attack can compromise their critical data.
Let’s assume the website login page we discussed above lacks input validation and sanitization. This means that it is vulnerable to SQL injection. The attacker does not know the password of the user John. They will type the following input in the given fields:
Username: John
Password: abc' OR 1=1;-- -
This time, the attacker typed a random string abc and an injected string ' OR 1=1;-- -. The SQL query that the website would send to the database will now become the following:
SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = 'John' AND password = 'abc' OR 1=1;-- -';

Automated SQL injection tool---
SQLMap is an automated tool for detecting and exploiting SQL injection vulnerabilities in web applications. It simplifies the process of identifying these vulnerabilities.
As this is a command-line tool, you must open your Linux OS terminal to use it. The --help command with SQLMap will list all the available flags you can use. If you don't want to manually add the flags to each command, use the--wizard flag with SQLMap. When you use this flag, the tool will guide you through each step and ask questions to complete the scan, making this a perfect option for beginners.
The --dbs flag helps you to extract all the database names. Once you get to know the database names, you can extract information about the tables of that database by using-D database_name --tables. After obtaining the tables, if you want to enumerate the records in those tables, you can use-D database_name -T table_name --dump. The different flags in the SQLMap tool let you extract detailed information from the databases. Now, let's take a practical scenario and use all the above flags to exploit a web application vulnerable to SQL injection.
The first step is to look for a possible vulnerable URL or request. You may often come across some URLs that use GET parameters to retrieve the data. For example, a URL like http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search?cat=1 uses a parameter cat that takes the value 1. If you see any web application using GET parameters in the URLs to retrieve data, you can test that URL with the -u flag in the SQLMap tool. This is considered to be HTTP GET-based testing. This approach is followed when the application uses GET parameters in the URL to retrieve data from the searches.
In real-world scenarios, many web applications rely on cookies to maintain user sessions, enforce authentication, or apply access controls. When testing such applications, simply providing a URL with SQLMap may not be sufficient, as unauthenticated requests could be redirected, denied, or return different content. SQLMap supports cookie-based testing via the --cookie flag, which lets you include session cookies (such as PHPSESSID, JSESSIONID, or authentication tokens) directly in your request. This ensures that SQLMap interacts with the application in the same authenticated or authorised context as a normal user. For example, after logging into an application via a browser and capturing the session cookie, you can pass it to SQLMap using --cookie="SESSIONID=abcdef123456" to accurately test injection points that are only reachable after authentication.
We will use a supposedly vulnerable website URL: http://sqlmaptesting.thm for the demonstration. Suppose that this website has a search option, and when you click on this search option and search for something, the URL becomes http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search/cat=1, which uses the GET parameter cat=1 in the URL to extract information from the database. As we know, URLs that have GET parameters can be vulnerable to SQL injection; let us scan this URL to identify if it has any SQL injection vulnerability.
user@ubuntu:~$ sqlmap -u http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search/cat=1
The results in the above terminal show us that different types of SQL injection, such as boolean-based blind, error-based, time-based blind, and UNION query, are identified in the target URL. These are different techniques for exploiting a SQL injection vulnerability. For example, in the boolean-based blind SQL injection, the SQL query is modified, and a boolean expression (that is always true, e.g., 1=1) is included with the query to extract the information. Whereas in the error-based SQL injection, some queries are intentionally modified to generate errors in the results sent by the database. These errors often contain valuable information about the data. Similarly, other SQL injection techniques can also be employed to exploit a database.
The results from the command we executed for our target http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search/cat=1 tell us that different types of SQL injection are possible on this URL. Let's use SQLMap's flags, which we studied earlier, to exploit them and extract some valuable data from the database.
To fetch the databases, we use the flag --dbs. Let's try this flag out with our vulnerable URL:
user@ubuntu:~$ sqlmap -u http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search/cat=1 --dbs
After running the above command, we got two database names. Select the  users database and fetch the tables inside of it. We will define the database after the flag-D and use the--tables flag at the end to extract all the table names.
user@ubuntu:~$ sqlmap -u http://sqlmaptesting.thm/search/cat=1 -D users --tables
Now that we have all the available table names of the database, let's dump the records present in the thomas table. To do so, we will define the database with the -D flag, the table with the -T flag, and for extracting the records of the table, we will use the --dump flag.
user@ubuntu:~$ sqlmap -u http://sqlmaptesting.thmsearch/cat=1 -D users -T thomas --dump
However, unlike the URL used for testing above, you can also use POST-based testing, where the application sends data in the request's body instead of the URL. Examples of this could be login forms, registration forms, etc. To follow this approach, you must intercept a POST request on the login or registration page and save it as a text file. You can use the following command to input that request saved in the text file to the SQLMap tool:
user@ubuntu:~$ sqlmap -r intercepted_request.txt 


















