Basic system information---
set - command is used to check the path from the command line.
ver - command is used to check the os version.
systeminfo -  command to list various information about the system such as OS information, system details, processor and memory

Network troubleshooting---
ipconfig - command tells the network information.
ipconfig /all - for more network information (consists of mac address).
The command syntax is ping target_name. Inspired by ping-pong, we send a specific ICMP packet and listen for a response. If a response is received, we know that we can reach the target and that the target can reach us.
Another valuable tool for troubleshooting is tracert, which stands for trace route. The command tracert target_name traces the network route traversed to reach the target.
It expects the routers on the path to notify us if they drop a packet because its time-to-live (TTL) has reached zero.
netstat - this command displays current network connections and listening ports.
netstat -h, where -h displays the help page(gives informatin about netstat).
-a displays all established connections and listening ports
-b shows the program associated with each listening port and established connection
-o reveals the process ID (PID) associated with the connection
-n uses a numerical form for addresses and port numbers

File and Disk management---
You can use cd without parameters to display the current drive and directory. It is the equivalent of asking the system, where am I?
You can view the child directories using dir
dir /a - Displays hidden and system files as well.
dir /s - Displays files in the current directory and all subdirectories.
tree to visually represent the child directories and subdirectories.
To delete a directory, use rmdir directory_name
type - This command will dump the contents of the text file on the screen
more for longer text files this command will display enough text file contents to fill your terminal window. In other words, for long text files, more will display a single page and wait for you to press Spacebar to move by one page (flip the page) or Enter to move by one line.
The copy command allows you to copy files from one location to another. ex- copy note note1 - this copies note file to note1.
move command to move files.
del or erase to delete a file.

Task and Process management---
We can list the running processes using tasklist.
You can check all available filters by displaying the help page using tasklist /?
Let’s say that we want to search for tasks related to sshd.exe, we can do that with the command tasklist /FI "imagename eq sshd.exe". Note that /FI is used to set the filter image name equals sshd.exe.
With the process ID (PID) known, we can terminate any task using taskkill /PID target_pid. For example, if we want to kill the process with PID 4567, we would issue the command taskkill /PID 4567.
chkdsk: checks the file system and disk volumes for errors and bad sectors.
driverquery: displays a list of installed device drivers.
sfc /scannow: scans system files for corruption and repairs them if possible.
/? can be used with most commands to display a help page.
shutdown /s to shutdown system.


