What is powershell ?
PowerShell is a powerful tool from Microsoft designed for task automation and configuration management. It combines a command-line interface and a scripting language built on the .NET framework.
Unlike older text-based command-line tools, PowerShell is object-oriented, which means it can handle complex data types and interact with system components more effectively. Initially exclusive to Windows, PowerShell has lately expanded to support macOS and Linux, making it a versatile option for IT professionals across different operating systems.
In PowerShell, objects are fundamental units that encapsulate data and functionality, making it easier to manage and manipulate information. An object in PowerShell can contain file names, usernames or sizes as data (properties), and carry functions (methods) such as copying a file or stopping a process.

Powershell basics---
PowerShell commands are known as cmdlets (pronounced command-lets). They are much more powerful than the traditional Windows commands and allow for more advanced data manipulation.
Cmdlets follow a consistent Verb-Noun naming convention. This structure makes it easy to understand what each cmdlet does. The Verb describes the action, and the Noun specifies the object on which action is performed.
ex- Get-Content
To list all available cmdlets, functions, aliases, and scripts that can be executed in the current PowerShell session, we can use Get-Command.
If we want to display only the available commands of type “function”, we can use -CommandType "Function".
Get-Help: it provides detailed information about cmdlets, including usage, parameters, and examples. It’s the go-to cmdlet for learning how to use PowerShell commands.ex- Get-help Get-date
Indispensable for users already familiar with other command-line tools, Get-Alias lists all aliases available. For example, dir is an alias for Get-ChildItem, and cd is an alias for Set-Location.
Another powerful feature of PowerShell is the possibility of extending its functionality by downloading additional cmdlets from online repositories.
To search for modules (collections of cmdlets) in online repositories like the PowerShell Gallery, we can use Find-Module.
Sometimes, if we don’t know the exact name of the module, it can be useful to search for modules with a similar name. We can achieve this by filtering the Name property and appending a wildcard (*) to the module’s partial name, using the following standard PowerShell syntax: Cmdlet -Property "pattern*".
The modules can be downloaded and installed from the repository with Install-Module, making new cmdlets contained in the module available for use.

Navigating the file system and working with files---
Similar to the dir command in Command Prompt (or ls in Unix-like systems), Get-ChildItem lists the files and directories in a location specified with the -Path parameter. 
To navigate to a different directory, we can use the Set-Location cmdlet. It changes the current directory, bringing us to the specified path, akin to the cd command in Command Prompt.
To create an item in PowerShell, we can use New-Item. We will need to specify the path of the item and its type (whether it is a file or a directory).
Similarly, the Remove-Item cmdlet removes both directories and files, whereas in Windows CLI we have separate commands rmdir and del.
We can copy or move files and directories alike, using respectively Copy-Item (equivalent to copy) and Move-Item (equivalent to move.
to read and display the contents of a file, we can use the Get-Content cmdlet, which works similarly to the type command in Command Prompt (or cat in Unix-like systems).

Piping , Filtering and sorting data---
Piping is a technique used in command-line environments that allows the output of one command to be used as the input for another.
This creates a sequence of operations where the data flows from one command to the next. Represented by the | symbol, piping is widely used in the Windows CLI
In PowerShell, piping is even more powerful because it passes objects rather than just text. These objects carry not only the data but also the properties and methods that describe and interact with the data.
To filter objects based on specified conditions, returning only those that meet the criteria, we can use the Where-Object cmdlet. For instance, to list only .txt files in a directory, we can use:
Here, Where-Object filters the files by their Extension property, ensuring that only files with extension equal (-eq) to .txt are listed.
The operator -eq (i.e. "equal to") is part of a set of comparison operators that are shared with other scripting languages (e.g. Bash, Python). To show the potentiality of the PowerShell's filtering, we have selected some of the most useful operators from that list:
-ne: "not equal". This operator can be used to exclude objects from the results based on specified criteria.
-gt: "greater than". This operator will filter only objects which exceed a specified value. It is important to note that this is a strict comparison, meaning that objects that are equal to the specified value will be excluded from the results.
-ge: "greater than or equal to". This is the non-strict version of the previous operator. A combination of -gt and -eq.
-lt: "less than". Like its counterpart, "greater than", this is a strict operator. It will include only objects which are strictly below a certain value.
-le: "less than or equal to". Just like its counterpart -ge, this is the non-strict version of the previous operator. A combination of -lt and -eq.
Select-String - This cmdlet searches for text patterns within files, similar to grep in Unix-based systems or findstr in Windows Command Prompt. It’s commonly used for finding specific content within log files or documents.
Terminal

System and Network Information---
The Get-ComputerInfo cmdlet retrieves comprehensive system information, including operating system information, hardware specifications, BIOS details, and more. 
Get-LocalUser lists all the local user accounts on the system. 
Get-NetIPConfiguration provides detailed information about the network interfaces on the system, including IP addresses, DNS servers, and gateway configurations.
In case we need specific details about the IP addresses assigned to the network interfaces, the Get-NetIPAddress cmdlet will show details for all IP addresses configured on the system, including those that are not currently active.

Real time system analysis---
Get-Process provides a detailed view of all currently running processes, including CPU and memory usage, making it a powerful tool for monitoring and troubleshooting
Get-Service allows the retrieval of information about the status of services on the machine, such as which services are running, stopped, or paused. It is used extensively in troubleshooting by system administrators, but also by forensics analysts hunting for anomalous services installed on the system
Get-Service allows the retrieval of information about the status of services on the machine, such as which services are running, stopped, or paused. It is used extensively in troubleshooting by system administrators, but also by forensics analysts hunting for anomalous services installed on the system
Get-FileHash is a useful cmdlet for generating file hashes, which is particularly valuable in incident response, threat hunting, and malware analysis, as it helps verify file integrity and detect potential tampering.

Scripting---
Scripting is the process of writing and executing a series of commands contained in a text file, known as a script, to automate tasks that one would generally perform manually in a shell, like PowerShell.
Invoke-Command is essential for executing commands on remote systems, making it fundamental for system administrators, security engineers and penetration testers. Invoke-Command enables efficient remote management and—combining it with scripting—automation of tasks across multiple machines. It can also be used to execute payloads or commands on target systems during an engagement by penetration testers—or attackers alike.
What is the syntax to execute the command Get-Service on a remote computer named "RoyalFortune"? Assume you don't need to provide credentials to establish the connection
Invoke-Command -ComputerName RoyalFortune -ScriptBlock { Get-Service }














